welcome back as we continue our special
coverage now hundreds of Palestinians in
Gaza have been killed on the eighth day
of Israeli air strikes at least 2,200
have been killed since Saturday let's
bring in Professor Norman finlin now
who's a specialist of the Israeli
Palestinian conflict he's also the
author of Gaza an inquest into its
martyrdom he joins us from New York
welcome to Al jazer let me ask you first
then in your view can Israel's
bombardment of Gaza be seen as anything
other than Collective punishment on a
vast
scale well I think it's rather more than
Collective punishment there are
different gradations in international
law one gradation would be Collective
punishment a second level would be a war
crime a third level would be a crime
against humanity and the fourth level
would be the crime of genocide I would
say this particular particular operation
is somewhere between a crime against
somewhere between a crime against
humanity and genocide under
international law there are fine points
but roughly I would locate it between
those two
categories given what you say I mean
cutting off electricity food and water
how can that be squared with the rules
of War as it were and international
conventions well it obviously can't be
squared
with uh the laws of what's called under
International humanitarian law or the
laws of war the cutting off of water
cutting off of
electricity Fuel and food uh to a
civilian population if you bear in mind
prime minister netanyahu's claim that
this situation will go on for a
protracted period of time if you connect
those two facts protracted period of
time no food no water no electricity
then it's hard for anyone to conceive
that being anything but the crime under
international law but the crime of
genocide in a historical sense should
hamas's military operation be seen not
just in isolation but in the context of
the root cause of the
conflict I think the more important
question is not hamas's military
operation but Israel's military
operation uh I myself these past few
days have been rereading my own book to
refresh my memory about the various
Israeli operations the most infamous of
which were operation castled in 2008 to9
and an operation protective Edge in July
August
2014 if you look closely of what
unfolded during those two so-called
operations really massacres uh they
approximate roughly what Israel is doing
now but Israel is now conducting itself
on a more intense scale and probably
it's fair to say on a qualitatively more
intense scale but the actual tactics if
you go back to those two other so-called
operations the tactics don't differ what
I think does differ this time is the
objective in operation castet and
operation
uh protective Edge the goal was to
terrorize the Palestinian population in
Gaza as well as Regional actors into
submission and a feeling of futility in
this particular operation the goal has
escalated and it seems to be an effort
to ethnically cleanse the northern
sector of Gaza and then declare it
Israel's new security zone so given that
new
objective uh the intensity of the
tactics that are common to all of
Israel's major operations uh people
forget and I will admit I myself forgot
until I sat down and start to reread uh
the history of those operations the
tactics don't really differ the
targeting of civilians the telling of
civilians to flee when there's no place
to flee the flattening of infrastructure
civilian uh hospitals ambulances that's
so to speak and I hate to use the
expression but in the case of Israel's
operations it's old hat that's how
they've always conducted the operations
and the fact of the matter is in my
opinion and I can't say I can prove it
it's simply based on my knowledge of the
subject matter uh if in N if in 2009 or
2010 Israel had been even
remotely held accountable for its
criminal actions against the people of
Gaza had there been any
accountability it's forgotten that even
in the Goldstone report by Richard
Goldstone in the Goldstone report he
described the blockade of Gaza as a
possible crime against humanity now as I
pointed out a few moment ago on the
scale of crimes under international law
crime of humanity Falls just below the
crime of genocide it's a very serious
crime okay let me just jump in there if
I if I may you mentioned Regional actors
there any War has unforeseen
consequences how much danger is it that
this could become a wider regional
conflict in your
view I think the danger is
uh in my opinion the danger is quite
High uh there has been a lot of talk as
I'm sure you know this past week about
Israel using this attack as a pretext or
using the events of October 7th as a
pretext for attacking
Iran if Hezbollah enters in in a major
way then the argument is going to be
made that hesel is simply an armed uh
unit or subdivision of Iran and
therefore it would justify an attack on
Iran and I do not believe but I have to
enter the caveat I'm not a military
expert but I do not believe Israel is
capable of fighting a war on two fronts
this is not
1967 it's a very different alignment
lineup of regional actors I do not
believe Israel's capable of fighting a
war on two fronts if Hezbollah enters
the war if Israel uses that as a pretext
to launch what it's wanted to launch for
a very long time now a preemptive strike
on Iran I can't imagine it can do it in
any other way except to use a tactical
nuclear weapon and at that point all
bets are off we leave it there Norman
finlin we very much appreciate your
insights here on aler thank you for
joining us you're welcome